Libertarian conservatism is a political philosophy and ideology that combines right-libertarian politics and conservative values. Libertarian conservatism prioritizes liberty as its main idea, promoting free expression, freedom of choice and free market capitalism to achieve socially and culturally conservative ends as they reject liberal social engineering. Frank Meyer, a prominent contributor to the National Review, has called this combination "fusionism".


== History ==
Libertarian conservatism began as an expression of individualism and the demand for personal freedom.
Libertarian conservatives can include people who are proud of their roots and of their heritage and believe in American exceptionalism due to their strong belief in the value of the United States Constitution. They promote a patriotic acceptance of a nation's ethnic, cultural and political history. They are associated with right-wing populism, anti-globalization and resistance to global liberalism in order to remain competitive in international business while maintaining support for the military, veterans and border security.
Libertarian conservatives principles are defined as the following:
The policy should always be considerate of civil liberties.
The policy should oppose government over regulation.
The policy that provides rational, free market incentives is the best choice.
A policy of diplomacy that promotes liberal democracy, individual liberty and opposes dictatorship.
A policy of using the armed forces as a last resort, but without the need for consent by international parties.


== Philosophy ==
In political science, the term "libertarian conservatism" is used to refer to ideologies that combine the advocacy of economic principles such as fiscal discipline, respect for contracts, defense of private property and free markets and the traditional conservative stress on self-help and freedom of choice under a laissez-faire and economically liberal capitalist society with social tenets such as the importance of religion and the value of traditional morality through a framework of limited, constitutional, representative government.
Freedom and Virtue: The Conservative/Libertarian Debate, edited by George W. Carey, contains essays which describe "the tension between liberty and morality" as "the main fault line dividing the two philosophies".
Nelson Hultberg wrote that there is "philosophical common ground" between libertarians and conservatives. "The true conservative movement was, from the start, a blend of political libertarianism, cultural conservatism, and non-interventionism abroad bequeathed to us via the Founding Fathers". He said that such libertarian conservatism was "hijacked" by neoconservatism, "by the very enemies it was formed to fight – Fabians, New Dealers, welfarists, progressives, globalists, interventionists, militarists, nation builders, and all the rest of the collectivist ilk that was assiduously working to destroy the Founders' Republic of States".
Thomas DiLorenzo wrote that libertarian conservative constitutionalists believe that the way to limit government is to enforce the United States Constitution. However, DiLorenzo criticized them by writing: "The fatal flaw in the thinking of the libertarian/conservative constitutionalists stems from their unawareness or willful ignorance of how the founders themselves believed the Constitution could be enforced: by the citizens of the free, independent, and sovereign states, not the federal judiciary". He wrote that the powers accrued to the federal government during the American Civil War overthrew the Constitution of 1787.
In the 1990s, Lew Rockwell, Murray Rothbard and others described their views as paleolibertarianism. They continued libertarian opposition to "all forms of government intervention – economic, cultural, social, international", but also upholding cultural conservatism in social thought and behavior. They opposed a licentious libertarianism which advocated "freedom from bourgeois morality, and social authority". Rockwell later stated that they dropped that self-description because people confused it with paleoconservatism, which they rejected.
Laurence M. Vance wrote: "Some libertarians consider libertarianism to be a lifestyle rather than a political philosophy... They apparently don't know the difference between libertarianism and libertinism".
Friedrich Hayek, Ludwig von Mises, Milton Friedman, Richard Posner, Richard Epstein and Albert Jay Nock have been described as libertarian conservatives. Former U.S. Congressman Ron Paul and his son U.S. Senator Rand Paul have been described as combining libertarian and conservative "small government" ideas and showing how the Constitution defends the individual and most libertarian views.
In 1975, Ronald Reagan stated: "I believe the very heart and soul of conservatism is libertarianism". However, some libertarians criticized Reagan for un-libertarian policy positions.


=== Economy ===
Libertarian conservatism subscribes to the libertarian idea of free market capitalism, wanting little to no government interference in the market. They favor Austrian economics and are critical of fiat money, supporting ideas like pay what you want cafes. Libertarian conservatists look for ways to privatize activities run by government, from airports to toll booths.
Edward Feser emphasized that libertarianism does not require individuals to reject traditional conservative values. Libertariansim supports the ideas of liberty, privacy and ending the war on marijuana.


== Prominent libertarian conservatives ==
Albert Jay Nock (1870–1945), prominent libertarian Georgist thinker, author and journalist
Ludwig von Mises (1881–1973), prominent Austrian economist and classical liberal thinker
Frank Meyer (1909–1972), journalist, politucal philosopher and chief proponent of fusionism
Ronald Reagan (1911–2004), President and conservative icon
Milton Friedman (1912–2006), Nobel laureate Chicago school economist, monetarist and political thinker
William F. Buckley Jr. (1925–2008), journalist, author, conservative activist and the founder of National Review
Murray Rothbard (1926–1995), heterodox economist, historical writer, political thinker and founder of deontological anarcho-capitalism
Ron Paul (1935–), Republican former Congressman from Texas
Richard Posner (1939–), Chicago school economist, jurist and prominent legal scholar
Lew Rockwell (1944–), right-wing anarchist writer, editor and political consultant
Rand Paul (1963–), Republican Senator from Kentucky
Thomas Sowell (1930–), American economist, social theorist, political philosopher and author


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Republican "Liberty Caucus", a group of libertarian conservatives.
"Frank S. Meyer: The Fusionist as Libertarian Manqué".
"What Libertarians and Conservatives Say About Each Other: An Annotated Bibliography", by Jude Blanchette, LewRockwell.com, October 27, 2004.