Presumption of guilt, in Latin, ei incumbit probatio qui negat, non qui dicit (the burden of proof is on the one who denies, not on one who declares), is the principle that one is considered guilty unless proven innocent. Generally, this is an argument from ignorance, a philosophical concept in which a thing is assumed to be true because not proved false.


== In the law ==
Presumption of guilt shifts the burden of proof onto the defendant, who must then prove a negative to achieve acquittal. The phrase has been in use since at least the 1840s. It is a default position based on pessimism and suspicion whereas presumption of innocence is based more on optimism and trust. There is a greater likelihood of obtaining a wrongful conviction. For example, in the murder of Lynette White case, a double wrong was committed in that innocent men were convicted, while the real perpetrator remained at large and a danger to the public
Presumption of guilt is a denial of an international human right under the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 11. Under the presumption of guilt, the defence must collect and present compelling evidence to the trier of fact (a judge or a jury). The defence must, in most cases prove that the accused is innocent.


== Widespread prevalence ==
Presumption of guilt is pandemic, occasionally erupting into epidemic proportions. Smaller instances include adverse accusatory reactions to unusual costume such as the burqa, or merely a 'suspicious stare' from the police. More severe is the blame culture inherent in bureaucratic organisations where those with the least responsibility are blamed the most. Belief in the 'Stab-in-the-back myth' – that Jews and profiteers were collectively guilty of losing the war for Germany in 1918 – is an extreme instance of guilt being presumed.


== Typology ==
Presumption of guilt may take many forms:
Guilt by association, for example, punishing the families of North Korean defectors.
Extrajudicial punishment such as lynching or other forms of vigilantism, which seek to bypass legal procedures;
Blaming the victim; for example, victims of rape in Saudi Arabia and Somalia.
Collective guilt, for example the belief that 'all Moslems are terrorists'; conversely, the terrorist may believe his victims to be collectively guilty of some perceived injustice, as in the case of 9/11. A belief in Jewish deicide expresses the view that 'all Jews are Christ-killers', though in fact only the Romans had the legal authority to crucify someone.
Rushing to judgement, for example equating arrest with conviction.
The obtaining of a false confession under duress or torture;
Judicial misconduct such as collusion with the prosecution; judicial murder
A frameup, such as the numerous kinds of police misconduct likely to cause a miscarriage of justice;
A plea bargain, which in the worst case may induce a guilty party to give false testimony against an innocent co-accused;
A fixed penalty notice or on-the-spot fine;
Precrime policies such as preventive detention
Preemptive action such as drone strikes;
Religious doctrines such as ancestral fault, the Apocalypse, in which sinners are condemned to eternal suffering in hellfire; the doctrine of original sin and the fall of man; mandatory penalties for the sins of heresy and apostasy; the doctrine of human total depravity, taught by several Protestant faiths; the Wrath of God, as for example in several flood myths.


== Motivation ==
Racial prejudice;
The authority fallacy, demonstrated by the Milgram experiment, in which persons may be too much inclined to follow orders from a perceived authoritarian figure; as in the extreme case of Hitler, Adolf Eichmann, and the Final solution.
Short-term political gain and the destruction of political rivals, as in the Stalinist show trials of the 1930's.
Dissatisfaction or impatience with due legal process which vigilantes and others see as 'weak'.
'Impatience and fear of jurors, 'media frenzy', a punitive culture, and cognitive bias'.
Psychological game-playing; the aggressive accuser is said to play mind games, while the victim is on a guilt trip. Guilt feelings may be residual from early childhood, in which all of us are powerless and presumption of guilt ('you naughty boy', 'shame on you, wicked child') is often the norm.
A mind-set which favours Apocalypticism. According to Jonathan Schell, the religiously orthodox may 'take it upon themselves to please a wrathful God' through the 'extinction of 'evil' mankind'. Apocalypticism attracts 'desperate, humiliated and defeated' people, says John Michael Greer; it 'offers a free ticket out of the troubles of everyday life'.


== History ==
Presumption of guilt is as old as suspicion itself. In ancient Greece, public officials were elected for very limited terms of office and barred from re-election, on the presumption that too long an incumbency would lead to abuse of power. Thucydides and Aristophanes pointed out that the crowd were too easily swayed by oratory and emotion. As Lord Acton wrote in the 19th century, again expressing presumption of guilt, "Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. Great men are almost always bad men,..."
Adolf Hitler was a persistent presumer of guilt in those he disliked. Being allegedly a psychopath and narcissist he tended to blame others when things went wrong. From 1918 he blamed Germany's defeat on the November criminals of the Weimar Republic for negotiating a truce when Germany still had the capacity to fight on; in Mein Kampf he wrote; 'every third German is a traitor'. In 1945, when it was clear that Germany could not win the war, Hitler wished to punish the entire nation for failing to meet his expectations, according to Sebastian Haffner.
Between 1947 and 1956, Many US citizens were unfairly accused of being communist agents or sympathisers and had their careers ruined during the era of McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare. However, the McCarthyites 'never produced a single Communist spy whose guilt was proved in court.'
In 1989, Ayatollah Khomeini, supreme leader of Iran, pronounced a death sentence by fatwa on Salman Rushdie and anyone assisting publication of his book, The Satanic Verses; 'I call on all Muslims wherever they may be in the world to kill them without delay'. the Fatwa was condemned for violating national sovereignty, freedom of speech, and the Muslim principle of fiqh.


== Self-incrimination ==
In the UK case Hale, 2 P. C. 290 (n), the defendant was alleged to have murdered his niece, who had cried out 'good uncle do not kill me', and then was seen no more. The defendant, asked to produce the girl in court, had fraudulently produced another girl disguised as the niece. The court presumed him guilty on this basis and he was executed. Later, the niece was found, alive and well.


== Sexual violence and harassment ==
The American actor and producer Jeremy Piven has spoken out against the Me Too movement, which, he claims, 'put lives in jeopardy without a hearing, due process or evidence'. Writing about Piven's comment, journalist Brendan O'Neill, suggests that the presumption of innocence, which barrister and writer John Mortimer described as a 'golden thread', is being weakened.
High Court judge Sir Richard Henriques has criticized UK police training and methods which allegedly assert that 'only 0.1% of rape allegations are false' and in which all complainants are treated as 'victims' from the start. In three cases which later collapsed, including those of Liam Allan and Danny Kay, police withheld vital evidence from the defence. It is difficult to assess the true prevalence of false rape allegations, but it is generally agreed that rape accusations are false about 2% to 10% of the time.
In March 2017 Elizabeth Truss, Justice Secretary, said "that from September juries across the country will watch the pre-recorded cross-examinations during a trial".
In 1990, Yale professor and radical feminist Catharine MacKinnon, is alleged to have addressed a graduation crowd thus; 'look about you. Statistics tell us you have just laid eyes on someone guilty of sexual assault'. In her 1989 book Towards a Feminist Theory of the State she alleged that 'all sex is akin to rape'.


== Internationally ==
In China there has been a 'spate of wrongful convictions' and alleged misconduct by police and prosecutors.
In Turkey, a suspect arrested after the July 2016 coup attempt was asked to pay his defence lawyer $80,000, reflecting the cost to the lawyer's career; he would be thrown off the bar. 'Bogus and ludicrous charges' and confessions obtained under torture, were allegedly widespread.
In Japan the criminal justice system has been criticized for its wide use of detentions, suspects were forced to make false confessions during interrogations.


== In popular culture ==
Crime of the Century (1996 film), starring Stephen Rea, was a TV docudrama which presented Richard Hauptmann as an innocent man wrongly convicted.
Presumed Guilty is a 1993 thriller by Tess Gerritsen in which a woman is wrongly accused of murdering her lover.
Presumption of Guilt is a novel by Archer Mayor in which detective Joe Gunther investigates a forty-year-old murder case.
The Netflix documentary Making a Murderer details the murder trials of Steven Avery and Brendan Dassey in which the presumption of innocence was 'deeply compromised'.


== See also ==
Dehumanization
Global policeman
Kangaroo court
list of miscarriage of justice cases
Offender profiling
People's Court (Germany)
Prosecutor's fallacy
Presumption of innocence
Racial profiling
Scapegoating


== References ==