Cameleon is a free and open source graphical language for functional programming, released under an MIT License.
Cameleon language is a graphical data flow language following a two-scale paradigm. It allows an easy up-scale, that is, the integration of any library writing in C++ into the data flow language. Cameleon language aims to democratize macro-programming by an intuitive interaction between the human and the computer where building an application based on a data-process and a GUI is a simple task to learn and to do. Cameleon language allows conditional execution and repetition to solve complex macro-problems.
Cameleon is built on an extension of the petri net model for the description of how the Cameleon language executes a composition.


== Features ==
Graphical Algorithm Editor,
Real time calibration,
Dynamic building,
Multi-Scale approach,
XML-based model for data definition and manipulation based on XML Schema, XPath and XQuery,
Easy integaration of new algorithm with the dev kit.


== See also ==

Bioinformatics workflow management system
Business Process Management
CEITON
Dataflow
Petri net
Programming language
Visual programming language
Workflow
Workflow patterns
YAWL


== References ==
JM Pereira, Modern Trends in Geomechanics, 2016
Kenichi Soga, Krishna Kumar, Giovanna Biscontin, Geomechanics from Micro to Macro, Technology & Engineering, 2014
Nasser Khalili, Adrian Russell, Arman Khoshghalb, Unsaturated Soils: Research & Applications, Technology & Engineering, 2014
J.-F. Bruchon, Effondrement capillaire, 2014
J.-F. Bruchon, J.-M. Pereira, M. Vandamme, N. Lenoir, P. Delage, M. Bornert, Full 3D investigation and characterisation of capillary collapse of a loose unsaturated sand using X-ray CT. Granular Matter, 2013 SegSand
J.-F Bruchon., Pereira J.-M., M., Vandamme, N. Lenoir, P. Delage and M. Bornert X-ray microtomography characterisation of the changes in statistical homogeneity of an unsaturated sand during imbibition Géotechnique letter, 2013
IPOL communication, 2012
Programmation par propriétés : application au traitement d’images, 2010
Cameleon language Part 1: Processor O. Cugnon de Sevricourt, V. Tariel, 2011


== External links ==
Official Web Site