Clipper is an xBase compiler, which is a computer programming language, that is used to create software programs that originally operated primarily under MS-DOS. Although it is a powerful general-purpose programming language, it was primarily used to create database/business programs.


== History ==
Clipper was created by Nantucket Corporation, a company that was started in 1984 by Barry ReBell (management) and Brian Russell (technical). In 1992, the company was sold to Computer Associates for 190 million dollars and the product was renamed to CA-Clipper.
Clipper was created as a replacement programming language for Ashton Tate's dBASE III, a very popular database language at the time. The advantage of Clipper over dBASE was that it could be compiled and executed under MS-DOS as a standalone application. In the years between 1985 and 1992 millions of Clipper applications were built, typically for small businesses dealing with databases concerning many aspects of client management and inventory management. For many smaller businesses, having a Clipper application designed to their specific needs was their first experience with software development. Also a lot of applications for banking and insurance companies were developed, here especially in those cases where the application was considered too small to be developed and run on traditional mainframes. In these environments Clipper also served as a front end for existing mainframe applications.
As the product matured, it remained a DOS tool for many years, but added elements of the C programming language and Pascal programming language, as well as OOP, and the code-block data-type (hybridizing the concepts of dBase macros, or string-evaluation, and function pointers), to become far more powerful than the original. Nantucket's Aspen project later matured into the Windows native-code Visual Objects compiler.


=== Decline ===
Despite these efforts in the early nineties under its new ownership Clipper proved to be unable to make a smooth transition from the MS-DOS to the Microsoft Windows era. As a result, almost no new commercial applications were written in Clipper after 1995. Three of the more important languages that took over from Clipper were Visual Basic, Delphi and Powerbuilder. Some existing Clipper applications continued in use for ten or fifteen years, requiring regular maintenance, but around 2015 the number of Clipper applications that were still used commercially on a daily basis was very small.


=== Revival by third-parties ===
The Clipper language is being actively implemented and extended by multiple organizations/vendors, like XBase++ from Alaska Software and FlagShip, as well as free (GPL-licensed) projects like Harbour and xHarbour.
Many of the current implementations are portable (DOS, Windows, Linux (32- and 64-bit), Unix (32- and 64-bit), and macOS), supporting many language extensions, and have greatly extended runtime libraries, as well as various Replaceable Database Drivers (RDD) supporting many popular database formats, like DBF, DBTNTX, DBFCDX (FoxPro, Apollo, Comix, and Advantage Database Server), MachSix (SIx Driver and Apollo), SQL, and more. These newer implementations all strive for full compatibility with the standard dBase/xBase syntax, while also offering OOP approaches and target-based syntax such as SQLExecute().


=== Usenet ===
The Clipper Usenet newsgroups are comp.lang.clipper and comp.lang.clipper.visual-objects.


== Programming in Clipper ==
A simple hello world - application:

? "Hello World!"

A simple data base input mask:

USE Customer SHARED NEW
clear
@  1, 0 SAY "CustNum" GET Customer->CustNum PICT "999999" VALID Customer->CustNum > 0
@  3, 0 SAY "Contact" GET Customer->Contact VALID !empty(Customer->Contact)
@  4, 0 SAY "Address" GET Customer->Address
READ


== Version history ==
The various versions of Clipper were
From Nantucket Corporation; the "seasonal versions", billed as "dBase compilers"
Nantucket Clipper Winter'84 - released May 25, 1985
Nantucket Clipper Summer'85 - released 1985
Nantucket Clipper Winter'85 - released January 29, 1986
Nantucket Clipper Autumn'86 - released October 31, 1986
Nantucket Clipper Summer'87 - released December 21, 1987
From Nantucket Corporation; Clipper 5
Nantucket Clipper 5.00 - released 1990
Nantucket Clipper 5.01 - released April 15, 1991
Nantucket Clipper 5.01 Rev.129 - released March 31, 1992
and from Computer Associates; CA-Clipper 5
CA Clipper 5.01a -
CA Clipper 5.20 - released February 15, 1993
CA-Clipper 5.2a - released March 15, 1993
CA Clipper 5.2b - released June 25, 1993
CA-Clipper 5.2c - released August 6, 1993
CA Clipper 5.2d - released March 25, 1994
CA-Clipper 5.2e - released February 7, 1995
CA Clipper 5.30 - released June 26, 1995
CA Clipper 5.3a - released May 20, 1996
CA Clipper 5.3b - released May 20, 1997


== References ==


== External links ==
Alaska Software vendor of XBase++
Apollo database engine supports CA-Clipper and FoxPro data files
Free Open Source Graphic,GUI & Form Designer for CA-Clipper
mini Clipper FAQ
Print from Clipper to newest Windows printers article
The Oasis is the largest file archive for CA-Clipper and xBase on the web
Visual FlagShip Clipper compatible compiler for Linux, Unix and Windows
Xailer Integrated development environment for Windows
Harbour Project A 32/64 bit multiplatform Clipper compiler
From CA-Clipper to Windows in 5 minutes How to install Harbour MiniGUI and compile a windows-exe.
DBFree - Xbase/Clipper for the web :Active web pages using server-side Xbase scripts, embedded DBF data engine, freeware, based on MaxScript Xbase interpreter (adds xBase/Clipper server-side scripting to IIS / Apache / Xitami web servers).
DBMax - MaxScript Command Processor :the Xbase interpreter for desktop and web applications.
The NTK Project, WIN32 Gui Framework for (x)Harbour, backward compatible with Clipper and Clip4Win.
CA Clipper Overview, CA Clipper programming language history and overview.